doc: add notes and questions for n31664 (#801)
bitcoin-core-review-club/website: _posts/2025-04-09-#31664.md

1. **Mempool unaware**: Does not consider the current mempool unconfirmed transactions when estimating fees. As a result, it remains oblivious to sudden changes, such as when high fee rate transactions are cleared and the mempool becomes sparse, leading to overpayment. Likewise, during sudden congestion, it fails to adjust, resulting in underpayment and missed confirmation targets.

2. **Package unaware**: Only considers individual transactions, ignoring parent-child relationships. As a result, it fails to account for [CPFP'd](https://bitcoinops.org/en/topics/cpfp/) transactions, which can lead to lower fee rate estimates, resulting in underpayment and missed confirmation targets.

**These limitations cause practical problems for:**  
- **Bitcoin Core wallet users** ([many now rely on third-party providers](https://hackmd.io/@kEyqkad6QderjWKtcBF5Hg/cChallengies-with-estimating-transaction-fees#Analysis-to-Confirm-that-CBlockPolicyEstimator-is-unreliable-in-some-situations)) due to the inaccuracies mentioned above.

> - **Lightning implementations** (e.g., C-lightning), which depend on Bitcoin Core's fee estimator, may construct HTLC transactions that fail to meet deadlines or pay more than necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Lightning implementations** (e.g., C-lightning) that use Bitcoin Core's fee estimator may fail to confirm transactions before their timelocks expire if it underestimates. If it overestimates, they may construct commitment transactions that pay more than necessary.
```

Author: Done

- **Bitcoin clients** ([e.g., BTCPay Server](https://github.com/btcpayserver/btcpayserver/pull/5490)), have switched to external fee estimators due to Bitcoin Core's mempool unawareness. 

> - **Others** ([e.g., Decred DEX](https://github.com/decred/dcrdex/pull/3046)), continue to see high fee rate estimates more than necessary even after the recent v29 [switching of estimateSmartFee mode to "economical"](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30275).

Author: Done, I've added some brief explanation, and link to a comprehensive overview.

> Bitcoin Core needs to provide reliable fee rate estimates to uphold the trustlessness and self-sovereignty of node operators and the services that rely on it. Relying on external estimators undermines these principles. Bitcoin Core’s fee estimator should be as reliable and cost effective as external alternatives.

Reviewer: what do you mean by cost effective?

Author: From Britacanna https://www.britannica.com/dictionary/cost%E2%80%93effective, I just meant users should not have to pay more than necessary.

> This PR is part of Bitcoin Core project [#30392](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/30392) which aims to address these limitations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PR is part of the Fee Estimation via Fee rate Forecasters project [#30392](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/30392) which aims to address these limitations.
```

Author: Done

- [PR #25380 builds on #23074 to just ignore CPFP'd transactions](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25380)
- [PR #30079 is yet another attempt at #25380](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30079)
- [Delving Bitcoin Post: Package-Aware Fee Estimator](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/package-aware-fee-estimator-post-cluster-mempool/312)
- [Issue #27995 by Sipa on improving fee estimation](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/27995)
- [Blog Post Discussing challenges of fee estimation](https://hackmd.io/@kEyqkad6QderjWKtcBF5Hg/cChallengies-with-estimating-transaction-fees)
- [Delving Bitcoin Post: Mempool-Based Fee Estimation](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/mempool-based-fee-estimation-on-bitcoin-core/703)
- [Empirical Data Analysis of Fee Rate Forecasters for ASAP (next-block) Fee Estimation](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/empirical-data-analysis-of-fee-rate-forecasters-for-asap-next-block-fee-estimation/1022)

## Questions
### **Conceptual & Approach**
1. Did you review the PR? [Concept ACK, approach ACK, tested ACK, or NACK](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#peer-review)? What was your review approach?

> 2. Why is the new system called a "Forecaster" and "ForecasterManager" rather than an "Estimator" and "Fee Estimation Manager"?

Reviewer: Perhaps add a question or two about the current situation so that people understand the problems.
It could also be helpful to briefly go over the current fee estimation design.

Author: I added more notes on the current estimator, Did not think of any more question.
Will push when I do, also happy to take explicit suggestions.

> 3. Why is `CBlockPolicyEstimator` not modified to hold the mempool reference, similar to the approach in PR #12966 [`#12966`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/12966/) Why is the current approach chosen and why is it better? Hint see [`#28368`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28368/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Why is `CBlockPolicyEstimator` not modified to hold the mempool reference, similar to the approach in PR #12966 [`#12966`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/12966/) What is the current approach and why is it better than holding a reference to mempool? (Hint: see [`#28368`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/28368/))
```

Author: Done

7. Why does [Commit 143a301](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31664/commits/143a301d3a3fc61e314b68308a47191543c75421) return the current height, and where is `nBestSeenHeight` set in the code?
8. Why is it important to maintain monotonicity when iterating through the package fee rates in ([Commit 61e2842](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31664/commits/61e28422f3ff7dd6e1c840b9eac442c1484aa015))?
9. Why were the 75th and 50th percentile fee rates chosen as `MempoolForecaster` fee rate estimate in ([Commit c7cdeaf](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31664/commits/c7cdeafd7045c794b289e2438cc60baeee7e6f69))?
10. In what way do we also benefit from making `CBlockPolicyEstimator` a `shared_ptr` in ([Commit e8f5eb514](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31664/commits/e8f5eb51434f9b75b7c3f347fe073a9b60eb977c))?
11. Why are mempool forecaster estimates cached for 30 seconds? Could a different duration be better ([Commit 5bd2220](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31664/commits/5bd2220422af02b20cb94dcd4c0e2c38e0284952))?

> 12. Should caching and locking be managed within `MempoolForecaster` instead of `CachedMempoolEstimates`? Why is it declared mutable in `MempoolForecaster`? 

Reviewer: What does "it" refer to? Maybe link to the declaration?

Author: Done

> 13. Why does the forecaster manager avoid returning a mempool estimate when the `CBlockPolicyEstimator` lacks sufficient data ([Commit c6b9440](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31664/commits/c6b94403bf9d5bf4fe9d5e5360b3d2c30a430d69))? When will this scenario occur?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
13. Why does `ForecasterManager` avoid returning a mempool estimate when the `CBlockPolicyEstimator` lacks sufficient data ([Commit c6b9440](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/31664/commits/c6b94403bf9d5bf4fe9d5e5360b3d2c30a430d69))? When will this scenario occur?
```

Author: Done

commit:
---

## Notes

### Motivation and Background

The current fee estimator in Bitcoin Core, used by the wallet and exposed to clients via RPC, is [`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/4c1906a500cacab385b09e780b54271b0addaf4b/src/policy/fees.h#L148).

This estimator maintains a vector of fee rate buckets ranging from 1,000 sats/kvB to 10,000,000 sats/kvB. These buckets are spaced exponentially by a factor of 1.05. For example, if the first bucket is 1,000 sats/kvB, the next would be 1,050 sats/kvB, and so on.
The estimator works by:
- Tracking each transaction's fee rate and assigning it to the appropriate bucket.

> - Monitoring transactions as they leave the mempool. If a transaction is confirmed in a block, the estimator records success in the bucket, along with the number of blocks it took to prove (i.e., the difference between the confirmation block height and the height at which it was first seen in the mempool).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Monitoring transactions as they leave the mempool. If a transaction is confirmed in a block, the estimator records success in the bucket, along with the number of blocks it took to confirm (i.e., the difference between the confirmation block height and the height at which it was first seen in the mempool).
```

- If a transaction is removed for any reason other than inclusion in a block, it is recorded as a failure.

> This data is aggregated using an exponentially decaying moving average, so old data points become less relevant over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This data is aggregated using an exponentially decaying moving average, so old data points become less relevant over time.
```

A naive fee rate estimate by this estimator would provide an estimate for a confirmation target n by going through these buckets from the lowest bucket to the highest bucket and returning the lowest fee rate bucket where more than 80% of the transactions first seen within these n blocks were confirmed.

However, the fee estimator is more complex than this. It maintains three sets of these buckets: **Short-term**, **Medium-term**, and **Long-term**, each decaying at a different rate.

These allow the estimator to provide fee estimates in two modes:

> - **Conservative** – Uses long-term data for more cautious estimates and is tailored toward users who cannot afford to RBF bump later, hence high fee rate estimates are often seen.

Reviewer: I don't think it's an affordability thing, but more if wallets don't support it / they want to get it right on the first shot?

```suggestion
- **Conservative** – Uses long-term data for more cautious estimates and is tailored toward users who do not plan to not fee-bump. These fee rates tend to be higher.
```

- **Economical** – Relies on more recent short-term data for making fee rate estimates, potentially resulting in lower fees.

> For a more detailed explanation of this fee estimator's design, see [John Newbery's Introduction to Bitcoin Core Fee Estimation](https://johnnewbery.com/an-intro-to-bitcoin-core-fee-estimation/) and the [high-level design overview](https://gist.github.com/morcos/d3637f015bc4e607e1fd10d8351e9f41) by the original author.

Reviewer: You should probably name either both or neither authors to be consistent?

commit:
---

## Notes

### Motivation and Background

The current Fee Estimator in Bitcoin Core ([`CBlockPolicyEstimator`](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/4c1906a500cacab385b09e780b54271b0addaf4b/src/policy/fees.h#L148)) used by the wallet and exposed to clients via RPC, has two key limitations that affect users:

1. **Mempool unaware**: Does not consider the current mempool unconfirmed transactions when estimating fees.

2. **Package unaware**: Only considers individual transactions, ignoring parent-child relationships.

> These limitations cause practical problems for:

Reviewer: You've briefly mentioned what the technical issues are, but haven't connected them to what the practical problems are.

package unaware -> can overestimate -> fees are overshot, wasting money
package unaware -> can underestimate -> people miss their confirmation targets
mempool unaware -> don't respond quickly enough to a rise in transaction volume -> underestimate -> people miss their confirmation targets

Author: Done

> - Bitcoin Core wallet users (the majority now rely on third-party providers)

Reviewer: citation?
```suggestion
- Bitcoin Core wallet users (many now rely on third-party providers)
```

Author: done

- Lightning implementations: (e.g., C-lightning)

> - Bitcoin clients: ([e.g., BTCPay Server](https://github.com/btcpayserver/btcpayserver/pull/5490))

Reviewer: Short descriptions instead of just names could help here. Also, why is this significant - should we just be really happy and delete the fee estimator from bitcoin core if there is a useful external one?

- Others: ([e.g., Decred DEX](https://github.com/decred/dcrdex/pull/3046))

This PR is part of Bitcoin Core project [#30392](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/30392) which aims to address these issues.
A detailed design document of the project is available: [Fee Rate Forecasting Design](https://gist.github.com/ismaelsadeeq/bcfa6b1216eef10076665551d9885722)

### Design Goals of `#31664`

1. Creates a pluggable architecture for multiple fee estimation strategies
2. Create the pathway for making fee estimation in Bitcoin Core both mempool-aware and package-aware
3. Maintains backward compatibility with existing code

```
                           ┌─────────────────┐
                           │FeeRateForecaster│
                           │    Manager      │
                           └───────┬─────────┘

>                                    │ owns

Reviewer: It might be helpful to explain what "owns" means

Author: Fixed

                     ┌─────────────┴───────────────┐
                     │                             │
            ┌────────▼─────────┐         ┌─────────▼────────┐
            │CBlockPolicy      │         │Mempool           │
            │Estimator         │         │Forecaster        │
            └──────────────────┘         └──────────────────┘
            (historical mempool data)    (current mempool)
```

### Implementation Details

> PR `#31664` introduces these key components:

Reviewer: General grammar/style nit: you use a mixture of structures here and in the other bulleted/numbered lists. Sometimes things are complete sentences and sometimes they are fragments, and in a mixture of tenses, e.g. we have "renamed" and "creates" and "create".

Also, I think we are missing some notes on how these components relate to each other?

Author: Done and add more notes on the components relationship

-->
{% endirc %}

Previous work and discussions to dig deep:

- [PR #23074 attempts to make the fee estimator package aware](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/23074)
- [PR #25380 builds on #23074 to just ignore CPFP'd transactions](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/25380)
- [PR #30079 is yet another attempt at #25380](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/30079)
- [Delving Bitcoin Post: Package-Aware Fee Estimator](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/package-aware-fee-estimator-post-cluster-mempool/312)
- [Issue #27995 by Sipa on improving fee estimation](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues/27995)
- [Blog Post Discussing challenges of fee estimation](https://hackmd.io/@kEyqkad6QderjWKtcBF5Hg/cChallengies-with-estimating-transaction-fees)
- [Delving Bitcoin Post: Mempool-Based Fee Estimation](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/mempool-based-fee-estimation-on-bitcoin-core/703)

> - [Empirical Data Analysis of Fee Rate Forecasters for ASAP (next-block) Fee Estimation](https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/empirical-data-analysis-of-fee-rate-forecasters-for-asap-next-block-fee-estimation/1022)

Reviewer: This is awesome! Maybe move it up to the end of the notes section?

Author: Done
